# Write-Up

Our goal was to visualize the top billboard artists over time, and we thought treemap would make for a particularly engaging visual encoding. Being able to see an artist's "area" change size over time and visually seeing the "biggest" artists led us to treemaps. We chose the 'Resquarify' method of determining the shapes of the rectangles so that the aspect ratio of artists was as closed to preserved as possible, meaning they would visually get 'bigger' as their songs got more popular. 

For interaction/animation, we decided being able to select date ranges gave a lot of flexibility of information; you can view the top artists in one week, or even in the whole decade! Initially we only had a single week selector, but allowing date ranges gave significantly more insightful information. The play button was a must feature we thought would be super engaging, so that people could watch the animations unfold. We were trying to figure out whether to display artist/song information on a tooltip or on the rectangle, and we decided to put the artist name on the rectangle and all the song information on the tooltip. We also thought including one of the songs of the top artist playing was an extremely engaging feature.
	
We played around with different ways to determine an artist's 'score' (the size of each rectangle. We ended up using the following method: for each week’s Billboard Hot 100 chart, we assigned every song on the chart a score equal to the square of 101 minus its position (so the 100th song receives a score of 1, the 1st song receives a score of 100000, and so forth). We felt that this was the best way to count all the songs on the chart, while giving extra weight to the songs that were ranked more highly. Then, we computed a score for each artist, equal to the sum of the scores for every instance of their songs on the chart (so for Drake, if God’s Plan was number one for two weeks, that would contribute 2*100000 to his score). With this method, an artist who had a number 1 spot for a given week would still have twice the score of an artist who had a number 50 spot for two weeks, which we felt was reasonable. We then chose to display the artists with the highest 15 scores, which we felt was a good trade-off between showing a diverse set of artists, while not including too many artists such that the treemap would be too cluttered and the photos difficult to see. The leaf size of an artist would then be directly proportional to their score.

Regarding our development process, we began by dividing up the project into a collection of tasks. These tasks included things like data collection, data cleaning, scripting interactivity on the visualization, and CSS design for the visualization. From here, we assigned a priority value to each task, and we determined the required time investment to complete each individual task. At this point, we each claimed responsibility for a set of tasks so as to ensure a roughly-even distribution of total required time investment to complete the project. In total, this project required about 60 people-hours of total time investment from all of us to complete it; meaning that each of us contributed about 20 people-hours of time investment. The time-consuming parts of this were collecting the data for the visualization through Spotify and using D3 to code up the interactive treemap. 

To collect our data, we used a Billboard dataset (1) which gave us the title and one author of each song for each week spanning back to 1958. For each unique song in this list, we also queried the Spotify API for all of the artists of the song, and their images, as well as a 30-second preview audio clip of the song.
	
In order to build the interactive treemap, we started with an example treemap contained within an Observable Notebook from Mike Bostock (2). Starting from this example, we modified it to dynamically update whenever the input data to the treemap is modified.

(1) Billboard Dataset: https://data.world/kcmillersean/billboard-hot-100-1958-2017
(2) Treemap Observable Notebook https://observablehq.com/@d3/treemap
